---
layout: post
title: "Week 9 - Media Files such as Images and Video"
---

## Today's Schedule

- midterm
- media
- class coding time and 1-on-1 check-ins

### Midterm Exam

## Working with Media

After all of the other work we've done this semester, working with images is quite easy.

To work with images, declare a global variable of type ```PImage```

```
PImage img1;
PImage img2;
//we'll have two image files
```

### How it works: Images

Make a new instance of PImage by loading in an image file in your setup

```
void setup(){
  size(500,500);
  img1 = loadImage("dawg.jpg");
  img2 = loadImage("cat.jpg");
}
```

Now that we've loaded our image, we can draw them to the screen.

```
void draw(){
    imageMode(CORNER); //the default, like rectMode's default
    image(img1,0,0); //now draw it to screen at x,y

    imageMode(CENTER);
    image(img2,width/2,height/2,200,200);
    //draws img2 in center as a square 200 wide, 200 high
    //width and height are optional parameters
}
```

Images can be manipulated just as other shapes. For example, they can be drawn on screen at ```mouseX,mouseY```. 

```
noCursor();
image(myImg,mouseX,mouseY); //replace the cursor with an image
```

### Where must your images be located to use them?

In the data folder.

Go to **Sketch > Add file** OR **Sketch > Show Sketch Folder** and drag your image files in there.

### Image Processing filters

*tint()*

- added like fill before drawing your image

```
tint(255) // original state
tint(100) // darker
```

adding a second argument, for transparency

```
tint(255, 127) //50% opacity
```

You can change brightness of red, green, blue components of color

```
tint(200, 0, 255)  //most red, no green, all blue components
```

**Note: If you use a tint on one image but want NO TINT on another, make sure you set it back to the default ```tint(255);```.**

```
tint(200,0,0,127)
```


## For next week:

Grading Rubric for final of virtual pet project:

#### Code

- Your project's code should be well-commented. Variables, functions and class names should be clear. Classes should be on their own separate tab.
- Your coding should be efficient. Break your code into meaningful chunks using functions and classes. Rather than repeat code, use loops. Consider how arrays might help your code.
- Your code should work!
- Don't hard code numbers. Use variables, width, height - for example - to make your code function on different computers.

#### Idea

- Your software should be accompanied by a description (more than a paragraph, less than a page. What is the idea? How did you approach it? What challenges did you have? How did you solve it? These are example questions. Feel free to add additional information.
- Did you base your functionality on other virtual pets, animals, Aibo, something else?
- What feedback did you receive on your prototype? What changes did you make based on that feedback?
- Your originality will be judged. Do not copy projects already found online.

#### Functionality and Design

- Is it clear how to use and navigate your virtual pet? Remember K.I.S.S. principles (*"Keep It Simple, Stupid!"*)
- How do you interact with it?
- Does the program flow (of your finite state machine) make logical sense?
- Do the aesthetics suit the concept? Is it engaging more than a minute? Is the interaction compelling for users?
- How does the virtual pet show that it's passing time?
- **A complete virtual pet must include both timers as well as interactivity (mouse or keys).**
