---
layout: post
title: Week 6 - Classes and Objects
---

Today:

* midterm review
* classes and objects
* Constructor
* member variables (attributes)
* methods
* Dot operator, this, new
* build Frogger
* finite state machine
* Creating a class (for a walker for example) vs. as a collection of independent data

## Classes and Objects

Processing (and Java) are **Object-oriented programming**.

Objects have properties.

I am a person. I have hair color, age, name, height, for example.

You are a person. You have your own hair color, age, name, height.

We have the same variables names. But my hair color, age, name, height are different from yours, and different from other people's.

**Objects have their own instances of variables and functions (methods)**

## What is a class?

In a programming language, a *class* is a defined code template that is used to create objects. We say that classes *encapsulate* objects. In other words, they enclose all of the variables and functions needed for each object. 

- They store functions and variables together
- A class is a template - a *cookie-cutter*
- They are used to *stamp out* individual Objects
- When we stamp out or create an object using the Class/cookie cutter we are said to be *instantiating* an object. Each object is an *instance* of the class.
- Each time you use the class to create a new object instance, it will have its own variables and functions assigned to it

Example:

My Class name is People

I have an instance of People with the variable name Carl. Carl's ```first_last``` is Carl Winslow. Carl's ```height``` is 68 (we may know this to be inches). I have another instance of People with the variable name Steve. Steve's ```first_last``` is Steve_Urkel. Steve's ```height``` is 71. Both have the same associated attributes (which we can think of as associated variables) but they each have their OWN that are independent from each other.

### To learn about objects, we are going to create Frogger

with a single Frog class and a Car class. There will be many cars, each with their own x,y,color,and xspeed.



#### How to write a class
* example taken from Daniel Shiffman, Learning Processing

```
void setup(){

}

void draw(){

}

//note that by convention we capitalize a class name
class Car {

}
```

#### Let's create a class

We create a new object with the ```new``` operator.

main structure of our program:

```
Car myCar; //declares an object myCar of type Car

void setup(){
  myCar = newCar(); //this is the object initialization.
}

void draw(){
    background(255);
    myCar.move();
    myCar.display();
}
```

By convention, we place our classes in their own tab in Processing. Click the New Tab, and name the file with the class name. When you save your Processing program it will save your code from all of the tabs.

Keep in mind that when you are looking at one tab and hit the compile/run button it will also compile and run the code from your other tabs even though you can't see them all open simultaneously.

It is recommended to keep your global variables, setup, draw on the first tab, and generally our user-defined functions. Place your Class definitions on other tabs.

Let's create our Car class. Open a new tab. Now add:

```
class Car {

  color c;
  float xpos;
  float ypos;
  float xspeed;

  Car() {
    c = color(255);
    xpos = width/2;
    ypos = height/2;
    xspeed = 1;
  }

  void display() {
    //The car is just a rectangle
    rectMode(CENTER);
    fill(c);
    rect(xpos, ypos, 20, 10);
  }

  void move(){
    xpos = xpos + xspeed;
    if (xpos > width){
      xpos = 0;
    }
  }
}
```


### Objects with arguments

When you pass in a variable when you call a function, you are technically passing in the value of the variable at that moment.

Objects work differently. When you supply an argument to an object created with a class, you create a temporary reference to stand in for the variable you will be passing in.

*from Learning Processing*

```
Frog f; //declares an object f of type Frog

void setup(){
    f = new Frog(100); //100 goes into tempTongueLength
}

class Frog{
  int tongueLength; //creates an instance variable

  Frog (int tempTongueLength){ //temporary local variable
      tongueLength = tempTongueLength; //assigns the value to tongueLength
  }
}
```

### Question: When do you use a class/object versus when do you use a function?


## Homework Programming

Build off the work we did in class to finish your Frogger-derived game. You can make your game more or less difficult depending on the speed. Consider the speed of the frog, and of the cars. It is okay to deviate from the classic Frogger gameplay and make your own version (in fact, it's encouraged). Use functions, classes and objects. Pay attention to functionality. Make the game a challenge, but make it playable. Use variables.

1. Make a frog class and a car class. 
2. Use the arrow keys to control the frog. 
3. check if the frog has hit a car. If so, move the frog back to the start at the bottom of the screen. Hint: Consider how we checked whether the pong ball was on top of the rectangle. Use that knowledge to check whether the frog has hit a car. Add a checkForCollision() function inside your Car class and use on each car instance.
4. Add a score and lives. Start with 3 lives. If the frog gets hit 3 times, end the game. (background black and noLoop() ). Each time the frog gets to the top, add 1 to the score and start the frog over again from the bottom. When you die, print out the final score with println(). 

Make sure you break your code into modular functions. Add comments so that I (and you) can read and understand your code.

* Optional challenge: Add a countdown timer so that you have limited time to get to the other side. Each time you successfully cross (or get hit by a car and start over), reset the timer.
* Optional challenge for CS/M and advanced students: Add a gameplay dynamic so that the game gets harder each time you reach the other side.

